Might be worth it.
Come to you.
Please take a seat.
Thanks so much.
Hey, great to have you here. Good morning. Welcome to the Health Committee.
Just advise you around the rules of Parliament mean that when hearing your
submission, we have to be careful not to hear allegations that may seriously damage
a person's reputation.
If we're concerned around that, we'll jump in and ask you to move to your next
point.
But look, good to have you here. I know you're very keen to
submit on this bill,
and we have you for 10 minutes. There are likely to be questions.
But welcome to the Health Committee.
Sarah, you're Doctor...
Yasek.
Dr. Yasek.
Welcome. I'm Sam. You'll know members around the committee as well.
We have you for 10 minutes. If you want to leave us time to ask questions,
you may, but that time is yours, and I'll hand it to you now. Thank you.
Absolutely. Thank you. Kia ora, Sam and Health Select Committee.
Good to see you all again, and thank you for giving us this time
today. So in
1960, this Parliament removed attempted
suicide from criminal law. The then Health Minister who
introduced that change was Rex Mason, one of the great law
reformers of last century.
And he told the House almost 70 years ago that it
was better not to affix the stigma of criminal law
upon someone in crisis. Both sides of the
house agreed.
We are asking you to apply that very same insight to a different
issue today, accidental drug overdose.
That when someone is at their most vulnerable,
the shadow of the criminal law doesn't protect them, it keeps them from reaching
for help.
It has struck me as I've spoken to families impacted by
fatal drug overdose over the years and in reading the
submissions to this bill, how the current legal settings
that had a hand in the death of their loved one also
cast a shadow of stigma and has added an
unthinkable burden to their suffering.
I want to thank the committee for allowing anonymous
submissions to this bill, which has at least provided a
vehicle for those loved ones and those directly impacted by
non-fatal overdose to at last be heard.
But it's not just stigma that this bill will impact.
It will very directly save lives. We, of course,
support this bill, and of the 256
submissions that have been made public so far, only
one was in opposition. The rest are in support.
Of those, there are a handful of submissions from experts,
and then the lion's share are from people who have been
impacted in some way by the current legislative
settings.
This is because the impacted community know very,
very well,
that in reality, the fear of criminalization and the hesitation it
creates are costing lives.
We spend a lot of money trying to save people's lives from a
variety of other causes, from drownings to road accidents.
But in this case, all we are asking for is to pass a piece of
legislation that will enable equal access to
emergency care.
The stories in the anonymous submissions and the stories I've heard from
people paint a picture of why the law is needed.
A number of bereaved families that I've spoken to
have heartbreak stories of loved ones that have been
left achingly near to help.
Outside an emergency department on the lawn of a neighbor.
The intention of getting help was clearly there, but it is clear
from these stories that the fear of consequences
prevented them from properly accessing it, and those people are no
longer with us today as a result.
Police in our country are great at working alongside harm
reduction efforts, and we believe that this law will help to protect
police by providing a clear framework that removes the
burden on frontline officers from having to make difficult
decisions on the fly, and also protect them
from being accused of wrongdoing. Thank you.
We've made five recommendations in our written submission that I just want to
really briefly touch on and then hand over to you.
The first is to explicitly protect against
warrantless arrest, which is a relatively minor change,
but we note in US states where they do have this additional
protection, there are demonstrably better outcomes.
Last year, the Supreme Court of Canada had a ruling
that found that arrest protection is essential to this life-saving purpose
of the legislation.
Secondly, and for clarity, to avoid police potentially having to
assess everybody on scene, we
recommend removing remains to offer support or assistance.
This would just ensure protection in the chaos of a
rapidly moving situation. Thirdly,
we think that probably the intention of the
draft is to cover all illicit substances, so to
extend to substances covered by the Psychoactive
Substances Act and the Medicines Act and the corresponding
offenses to remove ambiguity.
Fourthly, we recommend some strengthening of the social sharing provisions, and
fifthly, removing some redundant words that add
to legal complexity in the bill.
This bill, while new to New Zealand, is an
extraordinarily mainstream measure and a no-brainer.
Every single US state has a version of Good Samaritan provision in
place, whether red or blue. And by passing this bill, you will help
to prevent serious health harm, unnecessary loss of
life, and the grief and suffering that goes along with it.
And thank you for your time.
Thank you, Sarah. Do members have que-- Cam.
Cheers.
Thanks for your submission. There's quite a bit of data in here about the
new submission. But I couldn't find anything talking about
how many prosecutions there've been since the guidelines were changed.
So there's the perceived risk and the real risk of prosecution.
This
bill is trying to change the perceived risk up front, so people at front of mind
call for help. But how many people have actually been prosecuted who
are in a social sharing environment?
It's not something we have focused heavily on because the perceived
risk of prosecution is indeed the bit that's
causing the problems. Prosecutions do happen, but we
don't wish to persecute the police for prosecuting people,
I guess.
Do you have anything to add, Jasit?
Yeah. There's
currently no such distinction in the law for social sharing, so the
data is not available that would
describe those specific scenarios.
What we've seen since the discretion amendment, because I think you're referring to
this one,
we've had
numbers of prosecutions, including charges and convictions
last year, that exceeded the pre-amendment
numbers.
Mm.
So the number of prosecutions has been rising, and it looks
like that amendment hasn't been that effective in preventing those
possession prosecutions.
Okay. Thank you.
Maria.
Just a quick question around your recommendation on warrantless arrests.
Is it
the issue of a warrantless arrest, or is it arrest in general that you're wanting
protection from?
That would be general.
Yeah, that would be general. The warrantless arrest would be probably the most
common situation in those scenarios.
But yeah, that would be in general all
arrests for the specified offenses.
Yeah. It's hard to imagine. I guess maybe police came into a situation where they
already had a warrant or something, and then they-
Yeah
... found an overdose situation. But the distinction is just not
to have an arrest in that-
That's essentially right. Yes.
Okay. So I can-- Thank you.
Any other questions from members?
Sorry, Chair. Can I
ask a question? Sorry.
How easy to
identify what is social sharing or small drug
sales or dealing?
You go, Jasit.
Yeah. That's probably a bit of an arbitrary issue.
So at the moment, the bill specifies it with certain conditions.
So there is a limit of people with whom this is shared.
In our submission, we raised a few ideas
about how to make it more tight and how to better reflect the real-life
scenarios. But in essence, what we want to avoid is
people being prosecuted for very common scenarios.
So for example, a group of friends are going to a party.
One of the people has a contact somewhere and is able to kind of
procure drugs on behalf of the group, and then later shares that.
Technically now, for Class B substances, for example, for
MDMA, that would be an offense of supply.
And we would like that to be in that protected
class of offenses when this is clearly not commercial supply.
This is clearly not a situation of somebody dealing drugs to friends, but it's just
a group of friends getting it together, and people being very concerned that,
hey, if we call, that person may be at risk.
Yeah.
But do you think that's practical?
Because as far as I know, most of the drug use or drug dealer, they
are a small dealer. So normally they sell drugs
within their friends group rather than they sell to strangers.
So maybe
a group of 50, 30 people having a party, and then one of them
actually starts selling drugs in there.
We can actually call them
social sharing as well. How
can you identify that? But that is not helping
us or to stop people taking drugs.
Yeah. So that only applies in those emergency scenarios.
So there is no way that the police would otherwise
discover that from happening. So there would be no prosecutions, because the police
would never discover that anyway.
So because these protections only apply in the situation where
emergency help is called,
then in all the other scenarios, that continues to be an offense, whether it's
social sharing or whether it's kind of larger scale supply.
That distinction only applies for in emergency scenarios.
It's not going to significantly impede police prosecuting people.
So does mean all the-
It's more focused on that very real situation where--
Because normally when somebody's taking a substance-
Of course
... somebody will have got it for everybody.
Just one more.
No, no. I'm over time.
Sure.
So I'm going to have to go.
I just wanted to examine
with the police element and what you might know or have
engaged with the police around police training, around how they exercise
discretion.
Do you have any insights in terms of how our police
are trained to exercise discretion on this issue?
Yes.
And it doesn't heavily impact this bill, I would say.
So discretion, we have had a couple of conversations.
I think part of the instruction around discretion was to not apply
it if there was anything else you could charge the person for.
And I suspect that's why we've seen an increase.
We've had more policing,
and therefore more people being swept up in that, and
drug charges being part of it. That's what we can sort of
garner from the information. But it doesn't mean that that's the full picture
either. So yeah.
Thank you.
Thanks, Sarah.
Thank you both for making yourself available. Your work in this space.
Thank you so much.
Thank you.
Right. And now I'm at
the New Zealand Law Society.
Debbie coming here by Zoom. They'll be coming in.
Chair, I have to be in the house
to be in the house. I've just done my
Hello. My camera doesn't seem to be working, I'm afraid.
Jeremy Finn here.
My camera doesn't seem to be working, so...
Right. I've got Professor Jeremy Finn and,
Debbie Wilson as well joining us today.
Jeremy, we can't see you, but we can definitely hear you.
Well, thank you for that. I'm sorry, I don't know what the malfunction is.
But,
the Law Society, to appear with Professor
Wilson on this, the Law Society doesn't really want to take your
time talking about policy issues.
But we do have, and have raised in our submission, a number of
issues about the drafting, which may cause more
complexity than I think has been expected by the people,
the proponents of the bill, and which might cause it not to
work as it was intended.
I wanted to talk first about the Search and Surveillance Act
issues and 34B4, and then I will hand
over to Professor Wilson to talk about
34B1B.
And if there are time, we can talk about other matters later.
Obviously, it's a wide-ranging submission, and we would expect
members to have questions, and we want to leave time for that.
The search
provisions in 34B
subsection iv state that to the extent that in the
circumstances described in subsection iiA a constable
has reasonable grounds to believe, et cetera, the constable must be treated
as not having the grounds that would authorize a search.
Now, there's a bit of a problem here because,
the question at the moment the bill only applies to
warrantless searches. I understand from the previous speaker
that they were concerned also about searches with a warrant,
and that's a point which must be made clear in the legislation.
Whichever way the parliament goes,
it's not satisfactory to leave
the question of searches with a warrant so that we're hanging in
the air.
The bill should say which it is. The second problem is
that it is not clear on the wording what will happen
where the constable already has grounds to
believe that an offense was being committed and could therefore make an
arrest or could
perform a warrantless search, or could use it to
procure a warrant.
So suppose we have an undercover constable at a
festival concert,
sees somebody exchanging pills for money,
and then
a customer or the dealer
themselves collapses. Now,
the fact that the person was handing out pills in exchange for
money would be a basis for getting a warrant to search their own house.
It would give a basis for an arrest.
Do we then say because somebody collapsed, that
they can't use that knowledge to procure a warrant or indeed
to make an arrest then or later?
What would happen if there'd been a warrant already issued on the
basis of the constable's
reasonable belief and the facts they knew, and then
before the warrant is executed, the emergency
situation comes up? Now, I know they're fairly technical issues,
but you're dealing here with the difference between people who may
be tried and found guilty of offenses and spend a lot of time in
prison and those who don't. And the legislation should be, we
suggest, very clear.
It would be particularly important, we think, to make a specific
provision for cases where
about information gathered during a
emergency call,
whether to be used for a application for a search warrant or
not. As it stands at the moment,
they
can't use it for the purpose of a warrantless search, but it's not clear whether
they could use it for a warranted one.
There's a related issue about how this will work
where the social sharing exception
is in place because the policing that
will often require the police to actually have inspected the
premises where the emergency happens to see whether or not there
are more plants or not. And the question of whether they can use that
knowledge is relevant, or is it a case that the
person charged would have to show that the
social sharing
exception applied. These are technical issues, I know, and the
Law Society would be very happy to further discuss them
with the drafters or the committee if need be.
But I'll hand over there to Professor Wilson.
Thank you. I'm going to just talk a little bit about the definition in
subsection 5 of drug related acute adverse reactions, because this
is obviously quite central to
what the amendment means to do.
There's a couple of wording in there that seems a bit strange.
So it starts off by saying that a drug related acute adverse reaction
means an unwanted or harmful physical or
psychological reaction.
So the language of unwanted, we're not quite sure who it is
that would determine that. So is it the person calling for help?
Do they have to decide that it was unwanted, or do they actually have to ask the
person who's taken the drugs whether the reaction is something that they wanted or
not? And that's obviously going to be problematic because that person is in
distress and perhaps unconscious.
So how do you work out what unwanted actually means?
The alternative is that it's a harmful physical or psychological reaction.
And again, we sort of looked at that and we thought, well, if you're talking about
taking a controlled drug, isn't the point that every reaction is harmful
in some way?
So we're not quite sure what those words are trying to
achieve, but they could be quite confusing to apply in practice.
The second part of the definition, if you continue on,
under subsection C, it requires that a reasonable
person would believe that the individual requires emergency assistance.
In law, when we talk about the reasonable person test, that's sort of an average
person,
and that's problematic in this kind of situation because the person
who's going to be considering whether emergency assistance is
required is probably also drunk or on drugs.
So that means they're slightly less competent.
They're not operating at the standard of an average person.
In our submission, we talk about cases
in Canada and in New Zealand that have looked at this, and they find it quite
difficult to apply a reasonable person test to a situation where somebody is
affected by drugs or alcohol. And they ask the question of
what the reasonable person actually is in that circumstance.
So is it just the reasonable, average person that's stumbled past the scene and is
sober, or is it a reasonable person who's on drugs?
So that's kind of a lower standard because they're not completely competent.
Or do you go the other way and say that actually it's a higher standard,
it's a reasonable drug user who is familiar enough with drugs
that they would actually understand whether this was a really bad reaction or
whether it was just the reaction that the person was aiming for.
So we're suggesting that maybe the language needs to be considered there, because
it's not completely clear what the test is actually going to be.
If we've still got time left, I'm going to pass back to Jeremy to talk about
accessories after the fact.
I think if, through you, Mr. Chairman, we were just open for questions
now. We know your time is limited.
Excellent. Thank you. We have two and a half minutes to go.
Are there questions from members?
Yeah.
Hamish.
Excellent. Thank you.
So I suppose the general question is, I appreciate that you're generally
supportive of the bill. You would say with
improvement to the drafting,
that you would support the bill even more?
I think the position we have, well, the Law
Society hasn't taken it to its membership, but any bill that tries to
save life is generally a good thing.
So we start from that premise. The question of where you draw the
line between measures which promote life
but may
mean people avoid criminal liability is very much a question for
Parliament. It's not for us. What we're saying at the moment,
this bill will not quite, we think, achieve what it sets out to do.
Yeah, and I suppose I probably worded that question
poorly. Do you think with a few amendments, this bill would be able to
achieve its
goals, its objective goals, or do you think that actually there's fundamentally
flaws for it to reach its objective goals?
I would say
if it can be amended appropriately, it can work,
and could work very well. I heard some of the previous speaker
talk about the fact that America has versions of this, and they seem to be
working. So it's a matter of getting it right, not a matter of
whether you should do it at all.
Thank you.
Okay.
All right. There do not appear to be any other questions from
members. Thank you very much for your submission. Appreciate it.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear. Thank you.
Thank you.
All right. We will move back into
private session